# Squinktronix Harmony manual

Harmony is a very simple module (on the outside). It takes a single input of a root pitch, and outputs a four part harmony. Harmony attempts to link chords together using the common practice rules for voice leading, as described in Walter Piston's classic text "Harmony".  

If the output is used to play a four voice polyphonic synth patch, it will sound more or less like "music from right before Bach". You don't need to know anything about music theory to use it, however.

You may select keys, and there is some control of the chords that will be generated.

## Panel

### The score at the top

This displays the last bar or two of generated chords. It is purely visual candy. If you don't read music, don't worry about it.

All durations are notated as quarter notes. The module has no conception of "time", so this is completely arbitrary. I like the way notes look with stems, so that's what I did.

Because the chords generated by Harmony are fairly "simple", the notation often comes out looking pretty good. But there are probably ways to make the stems run into each other or something else bad.

The score should have a correct key signature on the left. You can't control whether it will display sharps or flats, but they should be correct.

### The input

There is a single CV input. It's monophonic, and follows the VCV voltage standards. The input is quantized to the current scale. If it has changed, new output is generated.

The input is used to determine which chord to generate, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7. The octave information is ignored. Also ignored are any non-scale notes in the input, they are quantized to the nearest scale note.

### The outputs

There are four CV outputs. If all four are used they are monophonic, and there is one for each outputs voice: bass, tenor, alto, and soprano.

If all outputs are not patched, then some outputs will be polyphonic. An unpatched output voice will come out the next connected jack. For some simple examples:

* If only the last jack, Soprano, is patched, it will be four voice polyphonic, with Bass on channel 0 up to Soprano on channel 3.
* if the Bass output is not patched, but Tenor is, it will have to channels.

This "1-CV" feature is new, and is always on.

### The controls

On the top are two controls that let you pick and diatonic mode and root. For example "C Minor" or "A sharp Dorian". Note that you may only specify accidentals as "sharps" even though it might make more sense in some cases to use flats. For example, if you want B flat you must use A#.

See below for more on using non-major modes with Harmony.

### The context menu

Has a single entry that lets you select white notes on a black background, or black notes on a white background.

## Getting good results

Harmony tries to output decent chord progressions regardless of the input. So you feed anything into it and get a plausible output. But if you want it to sound "right" to ears from 1700, you need to spend a little care with the input.

For example, you can patch a knob into the CV input, twist the knob, and get out a sequence of chords. But they won't get great sounding. This is because Harmony will see that your are entering a chord progression of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 etc.. which is not a chord progression that works well with common practice harmony. It is very difficult to connect this "bizarre" chord progression without breaking any rule.

A chord progression of 1-5 is super easy to connect, but 1,2,3,4,5 is very difficult. So try to apply clean, discrete input to Harmony, not slowly changing input. Even if the input moves fast enough that you don't hear 1,2,3,4,5 Harmony heard it and tried to harmonize it. When you settle on the 5 Harmony may have take a tortuous path to get there, and the result won't sound as good as a clean 1-5 input.

## Using in "other" modes

All the voice leading rules that Harmony knows are from Major keys. Although Harmony will happily apply these rules to other modes, that are not legit "rule" in other key. Here are some simple examples:

In a major key, the leading tone (major 7) really wants to "resolve" to the tonic. Harmony knows this. But in a minor key Harmony will try just as hard to resolve a minor 7th up to the tonic. Which is fine, but not as necessary. That is why musicians invented the melodic minor scale. Harmony does not understand the Melodic minor.

Another example: the triad on the 5th scale degree (the dominant) is a very strong and stable chord in a major key. But in some modes, like Phrygian, the triad on the 5th is a diminished chord, and will have a much different role.

The bottom line: you may get very interesting and useful results with non-major modes. Or they may sound somewhat broken to you. They would for sure sound strange to Bach.

## Current Limitations

Other limitations:

* The input quantizer may not work super well with messy input.
* No panel design.
* When a change is detected on the input a lot of code runs. May cause clicks and pops with low buffer settings.

## How it works, and what rules does it know

Every time Harmony sees a new note it takes that new note as the scale degree of a chord to be generated. The chord is supposed to sound good following the previous chord.

So Harmony picks chords that it can "legally" make from that scale degree. It evaluates the chord in the context of the previous chord. The one that breaks the fewest rules for voice leading is then used.

The chords may be in any inversion. They will be major, minor or diminished triads, as only one will follow the key signature without accidentals.

The criteria for a valid chord:

* Each triad chord tone (1, 3, 5) is in the chord at least once.
* The chords are always triads, with one voice doubled. i.e. they are never 7th chords.
* The four voices of the chord are in the generally allowable ranges of those voices (bass, tenor, alto, soprano).

The rules:

Many of these rules are from Piston's Harmony. A few are ad-hoc, or from from other source.

* Chords should not repeat exactly the same as they were two steps back. ex: if the progression is 1-5-1, the two 1 chords should be voiced differently.
* For any pair of chords, one of them should be in root position. This may be over-ridden.
* A leading tone (7th) in a chord must either ascend to the 1, or descend. In addition, in a 5-1 or 5-6 progression a leading tone in the soprano must must ascend to the 1.
* Parallel fifths and octaves are bad. As are direct fifths and octaves arrived at via similar motion.
* No voice can cross another voice.
* All voices should not move in the same direction.
* When the two chords have no notes in common (like a IV-V progression), then the three top voices should move in one direction, and the bass voice should move in the other direction. All voices should move to the closest scale degree. (this rule is why 1,2,3,4 progressions are so hard for Harmony). You may turn this rule off from the panel.
* Doubling:
  * Chords in root position should double the root.
  * Chords in first inversion should double the third (bass).
  * Chords in second inversion should double the fifth (bass).
  * (There are less restrictive rules around this - something to investigate).
* No voice should "jump" more than an octave.

If the progression is an "easy" one, a chord might be quickly found that passes all the rules. In other cases Harmony might have to look at a lot of possibilities to find a good one. It may be that all the chords break a rule, and there is none that can pass. In that case the "best" one is picked.

